ECE: customize logging and metrics retention with ILM and data streams (#4968)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/monitor/orchestrators/ece-monitoring-ece-set-retention.md

::::

## Available index templates [available-templates]

The following list contains the most relevant index templates and data stream names in the ECE `logging-and-metrics` system deployment. You can check the entire list directly in {{kib}} **Index Management -> Index templates** page:

| Index template and data stream name              | Default ILM policy                                | Description |
|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| cluster-logs-<version>                           | ece_logs                      | Logs from all deployments managed by ECE |
| proxy-logs-<version>                             | ece_logs                      | ECE proxy logs |
| service-logs-<version>                           | ece_logs                      | Logs produced by internal ECE services |
| metricbeat-<version>                             | ece_metrics                   | Metrics from all containers and hosts |
| allocator-metricbeat-<version>                   | ece_metrics                   | Metrics from the {{stack}} containers running in the allocators|

::::{note}

> Index templates and data stream names include a `<version>` tag as part of their names, which corresponds to the {{stack}} version of the internal component that sends the data (for example, `proxy-logs-8.18.8`). This version can change after an {{ece}} upgrade and must be taken into account when applying any type of customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Index templates and data streams include a `<version>` tag as part of their name. This corresponds to the {{stack}} version of the internal component that sends data into the cluster, for example, `proxy-logs-8.18.8`. This version can change after an {{ece}} upgrade and must be taken into account when you apply any type of customization.
```
Just a suggestion. Feel free to ignore. :-)

2. Open the template’s contextual menu and select **Clone** to [create a new template](/manage-data/data-store/index-basics.md#index-management-manage-index-templates). When cloning the template:

    1. Assign a higher `priority` to the new template so it takes precedence over the default template.
    2. In the **Index settings** section, set `index.lifecycle.name` to the custom ILM policy with the required retention settings.

    ::::{note}
    Cloning an existing index template is recommended over creating one from scratch to ensure all required mappings and settings are preserved.
    ::::

3. Save the new template and verify that it differs from the default template only in the `priority` and `index.lifecycle.name` settings.

4. If you want the changes to take effect immediately, you can [manually roll over the associated data stream](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams/use-data-stream.md#manually-roll-over-a-data-stream) using the [{{kib}} Console](/explore-analyze/query-filter/tools/console.md). For example:

    ```console
    POST /cluster-logs-<version>/_rollover/
    ```

>     After the rollover completes, a new backing index is created using the new index template and is associated with the custom ILM policy. You can verify this by checking the data stream information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    After the rollover completes, a new backing index is created using the new index template and is associated with the custom {{ilm-init}} policy. You can verify this by checking the data stream information:
```

# Set the retention period for logging and metrics indices [ece-monitoring-ece-set-retention]

{{ece}} sets up index lifecycle management (ILM) policies for the [ECE platform monitoring](./ece-platform-monitoring.md) data it collects inside the `logging-and-metrics` [system deployment](/deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-enterprise/system-deployments-configuration.md).

> By default, metrics indices are retained for one day and logging indices for seven days, as defined in the `ece_metrics` and `ece_logs` ILM policies of the deployment. These default policies and their associated index templates are managed by {{ece}} and should not be modified.

Reviewer 2: About `ece_metrics`, the ILM policy is rollover 1 day plus delete 1 day, in total will be 2 days. If we do manually rollover, then it will be deleted 1 day after rollover, per [this ES manual](https://www.elastic.co/docs/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/index-lifecycle-management-errors#min-age-calculation).

```json
"ece_metrics": {
    "version": 1,
    "modified_date": "2026-01-27T04:09:20.303Z",
    "policy": {
      "phases": {
        "hot": {
          "min_age": "0ms",
          "actions": {
            "rollover": {
              "max_age": "1d"
            }
          }
        },
        "delete": {
          "min_age": "1d",
          "actions": {
            "delete": {
              "delete_searchable_snapshot": true
            }
          }
        }
      }
    },
```

Also this is the status in my lab:

<img width="604" height="604" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/967bafd5-55f2-4031-bd94-9e194267d0cb" />

It might be great if we could make this part more clear. WDYT? @eedugon

You might need to adjust the retention period for one of the following reasons:

> * If your business requires you to retain logs and metrics for longer than the default period.

Author: good point, I'd add a small note with a link to the systems deployments document where we ellaborate more on that.

## Available index templates [available-templates]

The following list contains the most relevant index templates and data stream names in the ECE `logging-and-metrics` system deployment. You can check the entire list directly in {{kib}} **Index Management -> Index templates** page:

| Index template and data stream name              | Default ILM policy                                | Description |
|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| cluster-logs-<version>                           | ece_logs                      | Logs from all deployments managed by ECE |
| proxy-logs-<version>                             | ece_logs                      | ECE proxy logs |
| service-logs-<version>                           | ece_logs                      | Logs produced by internal ECE services |
| metricbeat-<version>                             | ece_metrics                   | Metrics from all containers and hosts |
| allocator-metricbeat-<version>                   | ece_metrics                   | Metrics from the {{stack}} containers running in the allocators|

::::{note}

> Index templates and data stream names include a `<version>` tag as part of their names. This version can change after an {{ece}} upgrade and must be taken into account when applying any type of customization.

Author: Content updated, let me know your thoughts now.
